---
title: A Semester Without Social Media
---


My first semester of my junior year I finished all of my general classes (the classes have to take when you are in college to be more well-rounded). The only problem is that all of my classes left were my upper-level classes. So my second semester I would have to take three 300 level classes and two 400 level classes. I knew that if I didn't change my social media habit then my GPA would tank. So for the sake of my GPA I chose to do a semester without social media.

## Social Media Use Before
Before starting this semester I had tried multiple times to not use social media, mostly YouTube and Reddit for a while. I had already quit using TikTok and Instagram because I had no real attachment to the platforms. TikTok and Instagram had too much rage-bait content, and I wasted so much time, especially on TikTok because they use to hide the time. YouTube and Reddit was much hard for me to quit, because I can easily following things I actually care about with Reddit forums and enjoy the usually higher quality videos and the personalities the creators had on YouTube. 

The first time I tried to quit it was just for a day and it was for my social media course in college (A course that talked about our behavior with social media and how to be more professional on social media). The detox was for 2 days and I couldn't use any social media. The first things I noticed is that watching a show on Netflix was impossible because I couldn't focus on just the show. I needed to do something else while watching because I had gotten use to doing two things at once. And actively doing only one thing was not simulating enough. It was at that moment that I knew my attention span had been destroyed by social media and I knew that it needed to be fixed. 

The two day without social media made me realize how often I will just randomly open my social media apps, just because it was there. The amount of times I would click on the Reddit app while on this challenge just showed me how bored I was without the app. It also showed how I couldn't stay idle with my thoughts. After doing this little experiment I knew I needed to change social media habits, but I wouldn't try until I took my psychology class.  

In my second year of college I would take a psychology course that went over the basics psychology, how to apply it to everyday life and how it is used in everyday life. During the class I had to do a month long project in which I had to change one habit. I thought this would be my chance to improve my social media use and reduce the amount of time I spent on social media. My goal is that I had a base line of how often I used social media and I would try to reduce the time spent on social media by an hour each week. If I was able to reduce the time by an hour the week before I could get the positive reward of Twizzlers. Though I did think the experiment would be a good way to help reduce my social media use so I could get to the point of quitting, I was surely mistaken.

Tracking how much I used social media and trying to reduce it each week worked the first week, but then I had a hard time reducing my time by an hour every week after that. I think I was able to do it one other time during the experiment. Trying to reduce my social media use cause me to think about when I could use social media next. I would think about it all day and get withdrawal symptoms when I went more than a few hours without it. The only time I didn't focus on social media was when I was too busy focus on it. Being busy allowed my mind a break from worrying about the things I was missing and the dopamine I would get from every video and post I looked at. It made me realize that I need things to do when I use social media or else I thought about it all the time. I also knew that I would spend about 4 hours a day on social media, when I am actively tracking it. That is why I had to stop using social media during my last semester.

## Last Semester
The last semester of my junior year I chose to go the without social media because I knew that social media would take up a lot of my time. I wanted to test and see if I stopped using social media for the semester could I keep up with a much heavier course load. So I decided that January 1st I would go cold turkey and get rid of all social media including YouTube and Reddit. My university didn't start classes until January 8th so starting on the first would help with some of the withdrawal symptoms that I knew I would face before I actually really started the challenge.

January was the first month without social media and it wasn't to bad. Of course the withdrawal effects were not the best, but I tried to keep myself busy. To replace my habit of watching or listening to a YouTube video I would watch and listen to shows, movies, music, and podcast. I also started to get into books and read a lot more in this first month since my workload was way smaller at this point in the semester. The only real work I had to do at this time was my grading and studying as a tutor and teaching assistant.

February was about the same as January. The work loads of each class did start to get a bit heavier, but I still could do all the work way earlier than the deadline. I also finished a book that I only really read between my classes. I use to scroll on my phone usually Reddit so I was surprise I was able to finish a book. The withdrawal symptoms also stopped appearing as much as before and the FOMO I use to feel didn't really effect me at this point.

In March the workload became a lot heavier, and sometimes felt unbearable. Though it did become a struggle I was able to keep up, because I had hours of my time back. During this time I still had some free time to read and watch Netflix shows. My grades at this point were pretty high and had either As or A-s in all of my classes. Keeping up with my work for my jobs and completing my grading was faster than usual. I could also concentrate for longer without the need for a break.

April was just like March except everything was much harder. Everyone plans test around the same time, projects needed to be finished, and homework needed to be done quickly. My grades did slip a bit this month and I believe I had 2 classes in which I had a B+ in them. Though I did have exams in May, this was the last month of the experiment, because after I was done I started watching YouTube again and didn't keep up with the habit. That probably wasn't the best move though, but by the end of the semester I had finished with a 3.86 GPA which would be my highest semester GPA I have ever had.

## Things That Helped Me Stay of Social Media
The first and most obvious thing that helped me stay off social media is not having the apps on your phone or a device that is always on. Not having social media apps on your phone is pretty obvious because your phone is easily accessible, because it is always with you and never turns off. There just isn't enough friction to make it so accessing social media is hard. This also applies to other devices that never shut off like a tablet. You can add the friction by removing the apps, blocking the website version and only using your computer if needed. It adds enough friction to stop you from randomly jumping on an app when you are bored.

Another thing that I believed helped is not staying logged in and using extensions that make the platform not that appealing to stay on. Whenever you log onto YouTube you are first bombarded with tons a videos the algorithm believes you would like. With the algorithm trying to push more and more content that tries to grab our attention, you cannot help but look and watch for hours. Using extension like [Unhooked](https://unhook.app/) makes the experience a lot better for anyone trying to get out of YouTube's infinite rabbit holes. Staying logged out is highly helpful, because you wont be tempted to watch the videos, because it isn't going to be content you like. It will be content that is the most popular which is usually kids content and not something you will usually want to watch.

Another way to help keep you off social media is having a good reason to quit and lack a reason to use it. Without a good enough reason I don't believe most people would quit social media, due to social media being highly addictive. That's why you need a reason so strong that using social media wouldn't make sense. It also helps to not have a reason to use it anymore. Though removing the reasons can be a bit drastic because that usually means getting rid of your accounts and that does mean losing many connections that were held together only through the app. 

My last way to help you quit social media is to watch the videos or post off platform. Platforms like YouTube are meant to be highly distracting with all of the bright colors, large catchy titles, shortform content, and videos that you are only a tad bit interested in, but didn't come on the platform to watch. Being off the platform and only watching videos on creators websites will allow a less distracting way to watch things that you wanted to see in the first place.

## The Benefits of Not Using Social Media
There are many benefits that I experience while on this social media hiatus, but there are two that I found were the most important.

The first thing I noticed after the experiment was an increase in grades overall. My previous semester I only had 4 classes at a time and 10 hours of work per week. At the end of my semester I had earned a GPA of 3.8 with my 5 classes. (I had two half-semester classes) This semester I had 5 classes and 16 hours of work per week. At the end of this semester I had earned 3.86 with the same amount of classes as lest semester. Which means I had a .06 increase with my GPA with less time to work with.

The next thing I noticed was an increase in focus without needing a YouTube video in the background. I use to only be able to get through 15 minutes without needing a YouTube video on while I work on anything. So I use to go to YouTube to find a video to listen to. Then I would get distracted by all the other videos I could click and spend 30 minutes on YouTube instead of just doing the work I needed to do. Without social media I was able to work for 2 hours without needing some type of video in the background. Also the time I did spend doing work I got way more done than before.

## The Downsides of Not Using Social Media
These are what I would considered minimal downsides of not using social media.

One of the downsides of not using it is not being able to connect to people. This is most apparent on Snapchat, Instagram, and Facebook. This doesn't really appear on TikTok, YouTube, and Reddit because those apps don't really have the friendship aspect to it like the former apps. The problem is that people do not want to get rid of their apps because they wont have a way to communicate to someone. The thing is that if the relationship is so important then you would probably already be connected without social media. That is to say most of the relationships on social media are not as deep as many may think, and if there is important relationship you want to keep you can always give the person your number before you stop using the app. This idea of just giving people your number comes from the YouTuber Reece Daniels and his video [quit your social medias now.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qso39oQc5-g) .

Another minor downside of social media is the FOMO and anxiety without social media. The FOMO you feel when you go off of social media is a constant struggle in the beginning because you may not have anything to fill the time at first. Not filling your time with other activities will lead to the FOMO and anxiety being worse because you are left with your thoughts, which most aren't able to handle at first. You can fix this by filling your time with activities and the work you have been putting off. Cal Newport actually came up with a list of activities to help replace time spent on your phone. The list is reading, higher quality video mediums (things with a higher budget and more of a time commitment), skill-based hobby (something you can continuously get good at), exercise based hobby (something like weightlifting or running), get involved with communities that meet regularly (weekly or bi-weekly activities you enjoy), and seek out adventures (going somewhere you haven't gone before). The list came from his podcast [The Deep Life](https://www.thedeeplife.com/) which I would recommend to anyone who is trying to at least reduce their social media use and improve their productivity.

Overall my experience without social media has been pretty positive. I increased my focus, my grades, and my overall productivity. I plan on going my entire senior year without social media starting in August and seeing if I can do a full-year without social media of any kind. 

Thanks for reading!